Skip to content

Submit

Close search

About

Nutrition

Weight Loss

Shop

Help Centre

Login

Shop

FREE SHIPPING ON ALL ORDERS AUSTRALIA WIDE

About

Nutrition

Weight Loss

Shop

Help Centre

Login

Cart
Cart

expand/collapse

Previous slide

Next slide

QOTA POWDER: CHOCOLATE

98 reviews

Regular price

$55.00

Sale

Size

Large - 14 meal pouch

Large - 14 meal pouch

Quantity

Add to cart

One-time purchase

Subscribe & save

10%:

Delivery every

1

week

2

week

3

week

4

week

5

week

6

week

7

week

8

week

9

week

10

week

Subscription details

x

How subscriptions work
Products are automatically delivered on your schedule. No obligation, modify or cancel your subscription anytime.

Learn more...

Better nutrition through innovation.

Our best-selling powder for a reason! Our nutritionally complete chocolate powder provides a filling, convenient and nutritionally balanced meal designed to deliver sustained energy. 

Each meal delivers 2060 kJ (492 calories)

We include 30G PROTEIN in every shake because protein improves both satiety and the building of lean muscle.

We've maximised nutrition by packing 26 ESSENTIAL VITAMINS + MINERALS into every shake. Here’s what’s included in every QOTA meal: Vitamin A, Vitamin B6, Vitamin B12, Vitamin C, Vitamin D, Vitamin E, Vitamin K, Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Folate, Biotin, Pantothenic Acid, Calcium, Chromium, Copper, Iodine, Iron, Magnesium, Manganese, Molybdenum, Phosphorus, Potassium, Selenium, Sodium, Zinc. Phew!

Also contains ESSENTIAL FATS (omegas 3 + 6).

LOW SUGAR - everything you need and nothing you don't.

What you'll receive: 

Large pouch of choc powder = 14 meals

Shipping: Qualifies for FREE SHIPPING. Orders placed by 10am weekdays normally despatch that same day.

Ingredients: CHOCOLATE POWDER CONTAINS OAT, GLUTEN, MILK AND SOY. MADE IN A FACILITY THAT ALSO PROCESSES EGGS.
Chocolate Powder Full Ingredients
Visit the Help Centre
New Formulations Information
Sampler sizes available here

Back to Our Range

Customer Reviews

Based on 98 reviews

Write a review

56%

(55)

24%

(24)

8%

(8)

8%

(8)

3%

(3)

G

Gary

A healthy lunch in no time

I've had Aussielent on subscription for lunch for years.

I blend up a large batch of kale, english spinach, cucumber, banana and mint (similar to Boost Juice Caribean Green) and then freeze it in 250ml plastic containers. For lunch I microwave them for 1 minute then drop them straight into a shaker cup with Aussielent. If I'm working away from home, I drop it in frozen and it melts by lunch time. This way I'm getting all my greens as well as the other nutrients. The banana and cucumber cover any coarseness in the Aussielent. Overall its alkaline which settles my stomach. I've been doing this for years now.

The above could be made into a freezer product in supermarkets - green protein smoothies at home - just add water. I don't have time to do it.

I do think Qota could be improved. Could milk products be eliminated? For climate reasons we should minimise cows.

S

Sam

Make it the night before

I make this up the night before and it completely gets rid of the powdery texture. I’ve found even letting it rest in the fridge for an hour before drinking significantly improves the texture and taste. I also mix it with half low fat milk and half water, it adds a bit of sweetness without it getting too thick this way.

I have it every morning for breakfast,i drink it in the shower. I’m actually eating breakfast consistently for the first time in my life. Love it, recommend it to everyone. Salted Caramel and chocolate flavours are my faves.

C

Courtney

Powdery texture, bland flavour

Would not purchase again. Loved the Aussielent premade drinks, this doesn't come remotely close. Loved the original Soylent brand drinks too. This is a hard pass from me. 2 stars because I'll stomach it instead of throwing it in the bin.

Hi Courtney,

thanks for leaving a review! Sorry you didn't enjoy the powder. The powders are a completely different product/ingredients to the RTDs and we do find people tend to strongly prefer one over the other.

C

CW

A measuring cup with the first order would've been useful.

A measuring cup with the first order would've been useful.

I bought this product after reading online that it was similar to Huel. It doesn’t even come close. The flavour and texture leave a lot to be desired.

Our Nutrition bundles come with a free shaker and meal plan.

J

Jake

not smooth

The flavour is very weak and the consistency not smooth. The bags don't come with a scoop which is inconvenient and the shaker with a whisk ball doesn't get rid of lumps as well as the shakers that have a grid.

Our Nutrition bundles come with a free shaker and meal plan.

123

Subscribe to our newsletter

If you’re hungry for more healthy lifestyle goodness, follow us on Instagram or twitter. Sometimes we even get around to writing a newsletter!

Sign Up

Facebook

Instagram

Twitter

Login

Help Centre

Terms

Privacy Policy

Returns Policy

Contact

Copyright 2024
Qota

Heya! We are QOTA, thank you for being here. We are based in Naarm (Melbourne), near the waters of the Maribyrnong River. The lands we live and work on are the traditional lands of the Bunurong and Wurundjeri People of the Kulin Nation. We acknowledge their continuing connection to land, water, and sky, and would like to pay our respects to their Elders, past, present and emerging.